Summary for Laila is in a Meeting: Design and Evaluation of a Contextual Auto-Response Messaging Agent

This paper explores the design, implementation and evaluation of a Contextual Auto-Response Messaging Agent that models user availability using smartphone sensors. The agent autonomously sends context-aware auto-responses to incoming messages with the intended purpose of reducing user engagement with mobile devices during busy periods, improve situational awareness for the message senders. Lastly, this also helps maintain user privacy by moderated information sharing.

The approach taken by the researchers to resolve this problem statement was to implement a fully automated messaging agent that detects the availability of the user using smartphone sensor data like screen state, calender events, noise level in the environment etc. Based on this data the agent predicts when the user is not available and auto-answers the sender message in the same thread, conveying the user's unavailibity. Then the authors performed a two-week long user study involving twelve participants and recorded the participants' use of the agent in their smartphones. The data on factors like message responses times, engagement patterns and user perceptions of the agent's effectiveness was collected at the end of the second week.

Based on the user study, the researchers arrived at the key findings that the participants found the agent helpful for showing unavailibility without needing manual intervention. Many users reported a reduced stress on checking messages over shorter intervals which improved their focus on other taks. This agent also brought about some negative behavioural changes in the participants where as opposed to some users becoming less engaged to their phones, some user's frequency of checking their phones increased just out of curiosity about the agent's actions. 

The authors faced some challenges and misinterpretations during the user study when false positive in form of unnecessary auto-responses caused frustration and increases need to explain to the contacts which received those auto responses. Concerns regarding privacy where also raised by a few users who felt cautious about the agent sending location-based response as in a few cases this confused the senders about the user's whereabouts causing misinterpretations or even uncomfortable social consequences. 

Based on the privacy concerns, the researchers received feedback from users where they wanted more control over the content of the auto-response text and personalization options. Future works could include addressing these concerns with increased transparency and personalization options as it is very important that the agent's effectiveness and trustworthiness depends on its ability to provide unambiguous, pertinent and non-intrusive responses.  

In conclusion, the Contextual Auto-Response Messaging Agent has the potential to improve user interaction with devices by managing digital interuptions. A strong emphasis has to be put on the agent's effectiveness factors like accuracy, transparency and social acceptability so that this agent aides user communication without impeding user autonomy.
